The following is a digitization of the first part of a poem called "Minnetona, or the Indian Gift," which written by William S. Shurtleff and delivered to the Connecticut Valley Historical Society in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1881. The physical text was obtained from the Boston Public Library in September, 2017.

MINNETONA,
OR
THE INDIAN GIFT.
A HISTORICAL POEM,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
Connecticut Valley Historical Society,
AT

SPRINGFIELD, MASS., JUNE 6, 1881.
BY
WILLIAM S. SHURTLEFF
Published by permission from the Papers and Proceedings of the Society.

SPRINGFIELD, MASS. :
PRESS OF THE SPRINGFIELD PRINTING COMPANY.
1881.	

MINNETONA,

or

THE INDIAN GIFT.*


As one, who standing on a crowning hight,
  Out-looking far, with telescopic aid, 
Concealing from his concentrated sight
The intervening scene before him laid, 
Absorbed—long gazing—all the near forgot,
In one sense, is upon the far-seen spot;


So I, as to my mental vision's brought
The long ago, revealed by History's glass,
Excluding from my contemplation aught 
Except the far-time scenes that pictured pass
Across the disk,—the present lost to sense— 
Am partless witness of long past events.

A quarter of a thousand years, and more,
  My retrospections, aided thus, extend, 
What time, converging on this western shore,
  The paths of Freedom and Religion blend, 
And give me, gazing, wond'ring and intent,
To see them civilize a Continent.

 *This was written for delivery and not for publication ; which fact will account for, and, the author hopes, excuse its method. Its subject was suggested by an historical incident mentioned in the address of the late Hon. Oliver B. Morris, which is published in this volume. W. S. S.

And gazing thus, I look not down 
On beautiful and busy town;
But see a darksome forest frown,
Whose silent, grand but gruesome glades 
No ray of sunshine intervades;
But rest there ever somber shades,—
Save where a hutted hamlet 's strewn, 
Along a vale that 's open hewn
To sunbeams only of high noon,—
So thick the thronging trees arise 
They intercept the light that hies
From morning and from evening skies. 
So wide apart the houses stand,
They seem like tents of out-post band 
That pickets some far border land.

I see no teeming harvest fields,
Where Nature with complaisance yields 
To science cultured Ceres wields;
But, here and there, the stubborn soil, 
Subdued by rude but sturdy toil, 
Grants grudgingly a scanty spoil.

No factory chimneys crowd the skies, 
Where giant Steam, enslaved, supplies 
To Plenty superfluities;—
But home-sped wheels and spindles fly, 
Beneath industrious woman's eye,
To Need's awaiting lack supply.

I see no'palace-bordered streets 
Whereto Luxuriousness retreats, 
And Idleness with Languor meets; 
Instead, log Houses, simply planned, 
Constructed stoutly to withstand 
The rigors of a rigorous land.

No galleries of Æsthetic Art,
Where taste to taste does taste impart, 
And genius gains its meed and mart; 
But only Nature's grand display, 
Where awe's the only fee to pay
For entrance, open night and day.

No costly church, with splendid spire 
Essays approach to Heaven nigher 
By towering than its neighbor higher, 
Where salaried saviors more contend 
To forms of faith than faith extend 
Or other's mar than theirs to mend;
But "Meeting house" that, meek and plain, 
Doth adventitious aid disdain;
Nor seeks by graces grace to gain; 
Where simple faith its trust declares, 
And worship to its God upbears
In prayerful song and praiseful prayers; 
And, at each hearth, I see arise
A household altar whereon lies, 
Continually, a sacrifice.

No chime of academic bells
Unto the science-seeker tells
Where Truth has reservoired her wells; 
But youth, home taught, are conning o'er 
The ragged "horn-book's" scanty store 
Of simple times' still simpler lore.

I see no lines of business blocks,
Where Fashion clothes—and shears her flocks, 
And Speculation over-stocks;
But easy barter, by exchange,
Supplying well the narrow range
Of modest Want to luxury strange.
2

6	MINNETONA, OR THE INDIAN GIFT.
I see no rushing rail-way trains
Speed thundering o'er the trembling plains;
Nor even carriers' clumsy wains;
But burdens borne on shouldered packs,
Or on slow plodding horses' backs,
Along the inter-wild-wood tracks. 

Instead of smooth Mac-adam's ways, 
A road of earlier Adam's days,
Still stump-incumbered, devious strays 
From cot to cot, in hap-made lines,
As foot of stroller chance inclines, 
About the clearing's close confines, 
Or, winding eastwardly its way,
Seeks through the wild the distant bay—
Remote as Ind., to us to-day,—
Or wanders down the shaded shore
Of peerless river,—Ah! no more 
As pierless now as 'twas of yore—
Unbridged, but blessing equally
Its either bank, who could foresee
What "cross" its crossing 'd come to be?
A cross, some say—not I, we bear 
To caution us to better care
Whose head the county crown shall wear; 
But from this topic I refrain,—
'Tis unpoetic—ungermane; 
And, turning to the past again, 

I see no warp and woof of wires
Make roadways for electric fires
To run the errands man requires,
And, threading which, the spoken word
Is leagues away from utt'rance heard, .
Yet inter[crossed out] silence all unstirred !
But panting runner through the wold
Doth carry news that groweth old

Upon the way e're it is told;
Yet, eke, the prescient pioneer,
Close bending to the earth his ear, 
Through Nature's telephone doth hear.

Upon the hamlets' record rolls
Are numbered scarce a hundred souls, 
But souls they are—not simply polls; 
For, hither, in this doubtful day, 
No one has come, or, come, dares stay, 
Who brings not soul to face the fray 
By Freedom with Oppression waged 
In which is more to man presaged 
Than in all wars that erst have raged.

Here, in primeval forest broad,
Where Tyranny not yet has trod,
Our "Fathers" stand—apart with God! 
A little band, by soul strength stayed, 
In armor of their faith arrayed,
Of faithlessness alone afraid,
With only soul-solicitude,
Courageous they have come and stood 
To face the fate their daring's wooed, 
Imperiled as scarce band of men,
Of any age in History's ken, 
Self-choosing risk, have ever been; 
Unbroken forest, far and wide,
Where Danger seems at home to bide, 
Encompassing on every side;
A rugged soil unskilled to bear;
Disease and toil and scanty fare; 
Discomfort every way and where!

Ah ! what are taxes we impose, 
Or all the toil this people knows,

8	MINNETONA, OR THE INDIAN GIFT.
Compared with tax and toil of those 
Who, for the sake of Freedom, sought, 
And here to full fruition brought,
For us, the fruitage of their thought?

Ah ! think of this ! nor seek to stay, 
With selfish greed, the hand would pay 
Our debts, "past due," ah! many a day!
First, gratitude—the choicest coin
Of Heavenly mint, with no alloy in—
The only one Greed has no joy in! 
And, gratitude's just sequence, then—
As did for us those generous men
Let us for others do again;
Nor, wholly, to the Future cast
The debt the Present owes the Past
For wealth its thoughtful toil amassed.

As built the Fathers we should build,—
Not simply for our time and guild, 
But, finishing their unfulfilled,
Begin new structures, 'though the end 
Beyond our usufruct extend,
To heirs unknown alone befriend. 
Not all he has does any own;
Each reaps a crop a former 's sown,
And each should leave a harvest grown;—
As father, when his race is run, 
Bequeaths a venture well begun, 
To fruit to fullness for his son, 
Who, in his turn, if just, transmits 
Investments of his wealth and wits 
To his successor and acquits
Himself of obligations owed
For what on him his sire bestowed;— 
So, each bears equitable load.

But I am wand'ring, as I gaze
Upon the then of those grand days, 
Contrasting to the now's dispraise.
Those grand old days ! when Virtue reigned 
Despotically, nor ever deigned
To plead when Vice her laws arraigned, 
Or change decrees or right debate,— 
E'er Craft contrived to separate,
So utterly, the "Church and State," 
Or cunning Crime had found a creed 
Wherewith to garb itself at need, 
And fashionize its faultful deed.

Those grand old puritanic days! 
The Muse of History long delays 
A fitting tribute to their praise;—
Delays, may-hap, until the chime,
Should chronicle their deeds sublime, 
Shall better concert with the time; 
'Twere discord now; so let us turn 
And, from far retro-spection, learn 
How praise we owe, we, too, may earn. 
As, grandly, and in calm content,
So long as health and strength are lent, 
For faith to spend—for faith be spent, 
And reap no other recompense
Than that which Conscience aye presents 
When duty's done with diligence,
Our Fathers stand, all unawares 
The central group the canvas bears 
Whereon Fame 's limning his affairs

But lo! I see a startling change 
That does the tableau re-arrange 
To situation sad and strange!

Mournfully the wind is wailing
To the sighing, shuddering trees;
Darkly droop dun clouds, enveiling
Woods in deepter mysteries—
All Nature seems as ill at ease!

Rapider the river's running
To the shelter of the sea
Like ot one who, peril shunning,
Safety seeks in company!
What danger does the river flee?

Mournfully, men's voices, moaning,
With a sadness fill the air,
As of suffering souls intoning
Some unwordable despair!
What suffering does the sound declare?

Listless limbs are dully drooping,
Lately strong, alert and lithe;
Shrunken forms a-writhe, are stooping,
Erst erect and bold and blithe!
Why do they droop and stoop and writhe?

Voices, sunk to husky quaver,
Which but now were clarion clear,
Dying 'ere they reach the ear!
What woe seek they to tell and hear?

Eyes are lusterless and glazing,
Lately lambent in their light,
As if dazed and senseless gazing
At some stupefying sight!
What baleful view does vision fright?

MINNETONA, OR THE INDIAN GIFT.	11
Changed the caroling of childhood
To a piteous pleading faint,
Makes the song-birds of the wild-wood 
With unwonted note acquaint!
What pain provokes the children's plaint?

Implements of toil are resting,
Where, in field or home, they fell, 
Dropped from hands no more contesting
Combat late they waged so well,
Till stayed—by what mysterious spell?

And those hands that, late toil-gifted, 
Labor, now, no longer bear,
Feebly unto Heaven are lifted
Pleadingly as if in prayer!
What burden are they lifting there?

Why this woeful transformation?
  What has broken the bravo band? 
Lo! man's direst foe,—Starvation!
  Stalks through all the border land! 
Ah! him no mortal can withstand!

They, who have, so soul-steadfastly, 
Every other ill withstood,
To this trial now led lastly,
  Languishing for lack of food, 
Are starving in the solitude!

From them, who never yet have quailed, 
However otherwise assailed,
Gainst every onset triple mailed,

In faith and hope and courage given 
By ever equitable Heaven
To all who in its cause have striven. 
Starvation! that doth make the fort 
Less able for its own support
The more recruits its rolls report;
Starvation! whose shrewd scheme consists 
In multiplying what resists,
And weakness for ally enlists,
Has seized, in all the stricken land,
And broken, in his ruthless hand,
The "staff " by which must stoutest stand. 
Well may their fear-full faces blanch,
At this last ill that Fate can launch!
Yet, still their unstarved souls are staunch!

For see! although their hands are lifted 
To Heaven, it is in patient prayer, 
That only asks they may be gifted
With strength to this new burden bear.

No hand is clenched in desperation; 
No gesture tells of malcontent,
But open-palmed self-abnegation,
As, with their heads submissive bent,

They stand around their chief, devoutly
  And pure of heart and clean of hand, 
With face to God, awaiting stoutly
To learn and do His next command,

Well knowing that He ne'er misleadeth, 
Nor ever fails to hear and heed

MINNETONA, OR THE INDIAN GIFT.	13
His faithful follower who pleadeth
For strength apportioned to his need.

Assured that He, who hither led them,
Is with them still, to guard and guide; 
And that His hand, that erst has fed them,
Is powerful to still provide;

That He, who, when aforetime craven
By starved Elijah in his stress, 
Did even make the rav'nous raven
Purveyor of the wilderness,

Will also, here, in this far wildwood,
As unneglectful of their prayer, 
For pious age and sinless childhood,
In His good time in His way care.

And if it be their work here endeth;
  That here their earthly race is run—
Content, whatever His will sendeth,
Secure that so His Heaven is won!

Now, anxious, awed, I, watching, wait 
To see the good they supplicate
Avert the ill that seems their fate; 
But vainly search I everywhere—
The forest, field, the flood, the air
Are foodless, fruitless, barren, bare! 
No manna from the sky descends; 
No Heaven sent raven hither tends;
Nor God, nor man, nor aught befriends!
3

But behold! who so cautiously pushes 
Aside, near the path from the landing, 
The importunate barrier bushes,
And close to the open is standing,

Forward bending, the better to listen, 
Alert for retreat or advancing,
While her eyes, with some purpose a-glisten, 
Around her are eagerly glancing?

Minnetona!—the "Fawn of the Forest!"
Her eyes—soft as those of her namesake, 
But brave as the brave's that in the war rest
Defiant on Death for his fame's sake.

Fleetest form that the forest inhabits,
  Her footsteps now softly and light fall, 
And as cautious and sure as the rabbit's,
Home-leaping to burrow at nightfall.

Minnetona!—the red Chieftain's daughter,
  Her bosom, brown, bare and unboddiced, 
But as modest as Eve 'till sin taught her
That Nature could e'er be immodest.

Minnetona!—translated, "Glad Water,"
Like fount in a desert upspringing,
All the way-worn and weary that sought her
She sent away solaced and singing;

But now, strangely, some sadness has borrowed
  All gladness from glance of her brown eyes; 
And o'er-shading her russet-red forehead
A something akin to a frown lies
